The Brumaire Decree (10 November 1799; 19 Brumaire, Year VIII)

The Council of the Five Hundred, considering the situation of the Republic, declares urgency and takes the following resolution :

1. The Directory is no more, and the following named persons, owing to the excesses and the crimes in which they have constantly engaged, and especially as regards the majority of them in the session of this morning, are no longer members of the national representation : . . . [Here follow the names of sixty-one persons.]

2. The Corps-Legislatif creates provisionally a consular executive commission, consisting of Citizens Sieyes, Roger-Ducos, and General Bonaparte, who shall bear the name of Consuls of the French Republic.

3. This commission is invested with the plenitude of directorial power and is particularly charged to organize order in all parts of the administration, to re-establish internal tranquility, and to procure honorable and enduring peace.

4. It is authorised to send out delegates having powers which are fixed and are within the limits of its own [powers].

5. The Corps-Legislatif adjourns to the following 1 Ventose [Feb. 20, 1800] ; it shall reassemble with perfect right upon that date in its palace at Paris.

6. During the adjournment of the Legislative Body the adjourned members preserve their indemnity and their constitutional guarantee.

7. Without loss of their character as representatives of the people, they can be employed as ministers, diplomatic agents, delegates of the consular executive commission, and in all other civil functions. They are even invited in the name of the public welfare to accept these [employments],

8. Before its separation and during the sitting, each Council shall appoint from its own body a commission consisting of twenty-five members.

9. The commissions appointed by the two Councils with the formal and requisite proposal of the consular executive commission, shall decide upon all urgent matters of police, legislation, and finance.

10. The commission of the Five Hundred shall exercise the initiative; the commission of the Ancients, the approval.

11. The two commissions are further charged, in the same order of labor and co-operation, to prepare the changes to be brought about in the organic arrangements of the constitution, of which experience has made known the faults and inconveniences.

12. These changes shall have for their object only to consolidate, guarantee, and consecrate inviolably the sovereignty of the French people, the Republic one and indivisible, the representative system, the division of powers, liberty, equality, security and property.

13. The consular executive commission can present its views to them in this respect.

14. Finally, the two commissions are charged to prepare a civil code.

15. They shall sit at Paris in the place of the Legislative Body and they can convoke it in extraordinary session for the ratification of peace or in a great public danger.

16. The present [document] shall be printed, sent by extraordinary couriers into the departments, and solemnly published and posted in all the communes of the Republic.
